.\"
.\" This file is part of RGBDS.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010-2021, Anthony J. Bentley and RGBDS contributors.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.Dd March 28, 2021
.Dt RGBDS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rgbds
.Nd Rednex Game Boy Development System
.Sh EXAMPLES
To get a working ROM image from a single assembly source file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ rgbasm \-o bar.o foo.asm
$ rgblink \-o baz.gb bar.o
$ rgbfix \-v \-p 0 baz.gb
.Ed
Or in a single command line:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ rgbasm \-o - foo.asm | rgblink \-o - - | rgbfix \-v \-p 0 - > baz.gb
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rgbasm 1 ,
.Xr rgbfix 1 ,
.Xr rgblink 1 ,
.Xr rgbds 5 ,
.Xr gbz80 7
.Sh HISTORY
.Bl -item
.It
1997, Carsten S\(/orensen (AKA SurfSmurf) writes ASMotor as a general-purpose
assembler/linker system for DOS/Win32.
.It
1999, Justin Lloyd (AKA Otaku no Zoku) adapts ASMotor to read and produce GBZ80
assembly/machine code, and releases this version as RGBDS.
.It
2009, Vegard Nossum adapts the code to be more UNIX-like and releases this
version as rgbds-linux on GitHub.
.It
2010, Anthony J. Bentley forks that repository.
The fork becomes the reference implementation of rgbds.
.It
2017, Bentley's repository is moved to a neutral name.
It is now maintained by a number of contributors at
.Lk https://github.com/rednex/rgbds .
.It
2018, codebase relicensed under the MIT license.
.It
2020, repository is moved to the gbdev organisation, at
.Lk https://github.com/gbdev/rgbds .
The
.Lk https://rgbds.gbdev.io
website serving documentation and downloads is created.
.El
